>> Hello, hello.
Hey, Darian, Jeremy, Sylvain, and Frederick.
Welcome to all of you to Talk Python to Me.
It's great to have you here.
>> Hey, thanks for having me.
>> Yeah, thanks.
>> Thanks, Michael.
>> Yeah, you bet.
I'm honored to have so many Jupyter team members,
people around here, and all the work you've done on
the different parts of Jupyter Notebook,
JupyterLab, JupyterLite, all the things is really fantastic.
I'm looking forward to celebrating the new releases.
They're not quite as new as
when we first started talking about this.
It took us a while to put this many people together on for an hour,
but it's going to be great, right?
>> Sounds good.
>> Yeah, for sure. Before we get into the topics,
maybe just a quick introduction for each of you here,
and we'll go around the Brady Bunch circles in the video.
Darian, we'll start with you.
>> Sure. Hi. I'm Darian.
I work at QuantStack along with everyone else on this call.
I have been working on the JupyterStack for about eight years now.
I originally started working on what became JupyterLab.
Nowadays, in addition to that aspect of things,
I'm also part of the Jupyter Executive Council,
which is one of the governing bodies of the project.
As of this year,
we actually changed our governance structure.
Each year, there are elections and we have this new set
of governing institutions that I've been a part of.
>> That's really fantastic.
There's a lot of projects where there's one maintainer,
who is primarily the maintainer.
Then there's projects that get put under an organization like Flask with Palettes.
But there's not very many open-source projects like this that have governing bodies.
Python itself comes to mind, Django.
That's awesome. I think Jupyter is such a vibrant ecosystem.
>> It's an exciting space for sure.
>> Yeah, absolutely. All right,
Jeremy, quick background on you.
>> Yeah. I'm Jeremy.
I've also been working on the JupyterStack for a couple of years,
I think something around five or six years.
I started a bit like on my own first,
like a spare time thing,
contributing to projects on GitHub before joining Constack.
Currently, I'm mostly involved in the JupyterLab project,
so the Jupyter Notebook 7,
Voila Dashboards, also a bit of
iPad widgets and most recently on the JupyterLite.
>> Nice. Sylvain.
>> Hi, everyone. Yes, I'm Sylvain.
I'm the CEO of Constack,
which I founded in 2016.
I've been working on the JupyterStack for about 10 years now.
It's been a while. I think it's almost the anniversary right now.
In the Jupyter ecosystem,
I mostly worked on kernels, widgets,
the Jupyter server, and a tiny bit on the front-end pieces as well.
>> Excellent. It's a Jupyter space over there at Constack,
top to bottom, right?
>> That's right.
>> Awesome. Hey, Frederic, welcome.
>> Hey, everybody. I'm Frederic.
I'm working at Constack as everybody else.
I'm working mainly on JupyterLab.
I'm actually the representative to
the Software Steering Council of Jupyter for that sub-project mainly.
I started contributing like Jeremy five to six years ago,
trying to convince colleague in my aeronautic company back then,
to use Python and Jupyter instead of Excel.
>> You're fighting the good fight. That's awesome.
Yeah. Maybe I could ask you all a quick question
since it might give people
interesting view into the world of Jupyter.
There's a lot of reasons people get into programming,
but what attracted you all individually to the Jupyter ecosystem itself?
Darian, how about you?
>> I got lucky.
I liked the idea of working on open-source software,
and I'd worked at a few startups that released
open-source software but they were
startup projects that were driven primarily by one company.
Some of them had community in the sense that there were
lots of users and there'd be a lot of traffic,
say, on forums and stuff,
but not community in the sense of
public-minded group runs this thing and makes decision.
The decision was at my employers.
Nonetheless, I liked it.
I just accidentally happened on working with
the team that was building a new front-end for Jupyter
because I liked JavaScript
and other people in the Jupyter community did not,
so they had to bring from outside the Jupyter community in
because Python people at the time tended to hate JavaScript.
Now, I think that's still the same.
I got into Jupyter because I like JavaScript,
but I stayed in Jupyter because I
liked a community open-source project
that was doing something that I didn't really know you could do,
which is to mix your research and your results,
and the pros that you write,
and the output of the analysis that you do,
all in one document and share it with people,
and they can reproduce it,
and they can run your code,
and they can tweak it, and they can do all those things without
ever going through what I thought were the necessary prerequisites to writing code.
It turns out, none of those were necessary.
You could make it way easier for people.
I liked working on that.
I like the community. I like the people,
and that's why I'm still here.
>> Yeah. Excellent. It is pretty unique of an idea to say,
"We're going to have a document,
we're going to have results, and we're going to have code,
and it's going to be live." That's very special.
Jeremy, how did you get into Jupyter?
>> Yeah. I started as a user,
I think back in the days when it was still the IPython notebook,
all together just Python programming language.
I think that was really this idea of being able
to write normal text alongside code,
and have this narrative with charts,
interactive graphs, and so on,
and share that with two people.
I used it on my own for personal project,
but also different companies to share reports,
and then communicate results more easily.
After a while, when you start using a tool,
you want to make fixes to it or improve it.
That's how you can go to the contributor site,
start submitting pull request,
and getting in touch with the community.
>> Excellent. Sylvain, I'm going to come back to you.
Frederic, let's have your story.
>> That's a bit like Jeremy.
As I said, I try to convince people that
something better than Excel exist out there.
That's when I discovered Jupyter.
What was really interesting was the ability to,
as Aishin said, mixing very nice and advanced visualization with
text and being able to do that interactively so that in a meeting,
you don't have to remember which tab in your Excel is the right result.
It's like you just type two lines of Python code and you get
a nice graph to display the points you try to make from the data.
That was it. As Jeremy then,
at some point, he said, "Hey,
I can do some stuff better and I can contribute because it's open source."
I put my finger in that and now all my body is in it.
>> Awesome. I think one of the ironies is,
Darian touched on this actually,
that to use Jupyter often is to write Python,
but to contribute Jupyter is often to write JavaScript, TypeScript.
You're taking one for the team,
doing the JavaScript that no one else has to do.
That's a little bit different, isn't it?
>> I think nowadays with the maturity of TypeScript
as something that serious large projects can use,
it's a little bit better.
But it wasn't obvious to us as
a foregone conclusion that we should use TypeScript back in 2015.
I think over time,
that problem has somewhat attenuated,
but we're not in the clear.
We do definitely have a lot more people who would like to
hack Python than would want to contribute to
a gigantic TypeScript plugin-based front-end application.
>> Yeah, exactly. They come to
Jupyter because they're doing Python and they get really excited.
I want to be part of this. I want to help.
Oh, wait. Hold on.
It's a bit of an irony or
maybe even WebAssembly as we'll talk about, Jeremy.
All right, Sylvan, back to you.
I wanted to change the question a little bit for you and just maybe have you talk
about what are the benefits of having QuantSight,
the whole company being so in on Jupyter.
How has that affected you-all for your business?
>> Well, this is really how it started actually.
I was a Jupyter contributor back in a previous job before I founded QuantStack.
Really, QuantStack is almost an accidental startup in that I
started the company as a means to continue working on the project,
being paid by, as I was a core contributor already,
being paid by clients on
consulting contracts and whatnot to continue working on this.
Very quickly, we had
enough business that I could hire one other person,
and then another, and then another.
We bootstrapped from day one.
Our success, I would say,
is really bound to the success of the project.
I think it's been a positive feedback loop since the very beginning.
>> Excellent. Yeah. I'm sure it brings
a real advantage when people come to look and see,
"Yeah, this is the company to help me with Jupyter type of change,
maybe adopting Jupyter or some advanced deployment problem-solving."
>> Yeah. We're not trying to be the Jupyter company.
There are other groups and we really have
a consulting business model in that people
can really come to us for our skills and expertise.
It turns out that so far,
we've been able to contribute back everything that we've done,
or nearly everything.
In some occasions, we have to do something that's very ad hoc to a client.
Do some custom development that
requires using some of their internal APIs or whatever.
But I would say that 99 percent of our work is out there.
>> Excellent. Awesome. All right.
Well, let's start talking about just a recent event here.
Couple of months ago,
there was JupyterCon.
I think the videos have been up for two months.
So it's been around for a little while,
but multiple of you,
I don't know if all of you, I haven't gone through all of
the videos here but there's 86 sessions posted for JupyterCon 2023.
There's a ton of good stuff.
Maybe you all could just speak to the talks that you gave
there or some of the really interesting things that you want.
People should maybe check out because if you just get into Jupyter,
you can learn a lot by watching some of these talks, I think.
>> I have a recommendation.
Jupyter Notebook 7 was a talk where Jeremy and
a few other contributors to the project
introduced the new version of Jupyter Notebook.
Usually, when you go from version 6-7 of a software package,
it's an iteration.
But in this particular case,
it's a whole new application with a whole new architecture
that has the same experience of the Jupyter Notebook.
It has version 6 but has all new architecture and can use
the same plugins as Lab and it's pretty exciting.
I would recommend checking out that talk.
>> Absolutely. That was a good one.
That's also something that's main topic of the show is
this interplay between JupyterLab and Jupyter Notebook
and both of the big new releases.
It's a big change, isn't it?
Bigger than just the 6-7 would indicate.
>> Yeah. There are also plenty of other videos.
There are quite a few,
let's say, technical videos or more like product updates,
as we call them. Each sub-project has a talk where they
discuss and present their new features
or what they've been to in the past few months.
But there are also quite a lot of interesting talks on use cases.
So we can learn how people use Jupyter in the wild,
like in companies or also in education.
Those are very inspiring because they also give
people ideas on what they could do with Jupyter in general.
>> Cool. Yeah. Well, I certainly
recommend people check this out.
Then there was a talk that you,
Daryan and Martha gave introducing JupyterLab 4.
>> Yes, that's right.
JupyterLab 4 is also the first time we did
one of our keynote product launch talks
with the desktop version of the application,
just to expose people to this new way to use JupyterLab,
which isn't super new,
but I think is new to most people.
So we thought that would be a good opportunity,
not just to show the new JupyterLab 4 UI and its new features,
but also to show you can download it onto your desktop,
double-decker notebook, and open it up in JupyterLab.
>> Yeah. So let's set the stage about just what people,
maybe they've heard the word Jupyter,
they've heard the word notebooks, plural.
But they might not know the difference between JupyterLab,
Jupyter Notebook.
Maybe you all could position those two side-by-side.
What are these two different things?
Are they the same? Are they different? Are they synonyms?
>> Okay. So there is a file format that you
will see with the extension.ipynb,
because historically it was
the IPython notebook file format and we've kept that.
Those are called Jupyter Notebooks commonly.
It's a generic term for that file.
Then there is a browser-based application that millions of
people use for rendering
those notebooks and writing them and authoring them.
That application is called Jupyter Notebook,
and we just released version 7 of that.
There is a data environment that features notebooks,
but also has lots of other functionality
that we call the other front-end,
and that's JupyterLab.
JupyterLab has a notebook renderer in it,
among other things, for Jupyter Notebooks.
That same notebook renderer is what
powers the application called Jupyter Notebook.
I think if I keep saying these words,
you'll get more confused, so I'm stopping here.
>> In my mind, I think of Jupyter Notebook,
which is the single file view type of thing.
The little bit, not quite the right analogy,
but a little bit like the Vim or the Emacs user who
likes just to have a single file
totally open and just focus on that.
Whereas, JupyterLab is more like the IDE style.
I want all the tools and the extras.
I want to be able to get to my,
browse my file system, go to the terminal,
do all the different things,
and have multiple files open and work between them.
Is that a good mental model or am I not quite there yet?
>> No, I think that's right.
The Jupyter Notebook is a single document interface.
Even like Vim, it has a command mode and an edit mode and all those.
It's not a bad analogy at all.
JupyterLab is just a really flexible environment to do
a lot of different activities
in your analysis of any particular data.
It is a much more multi-tool for that.
>> Okay. Excellent.
Anyone else want to add more to that?
Those comparisons are daring.
>> Yeah. For the genesis of this, of JupyterLab,
the first tool that everybody saw and the whole world
saw in the beginning in 2014 was the Notebook.
Got a lot of people excited.
But there was a very recurrent request
for bringing together in the same page,
the text editor, the terminals,
having a console as well,
a regular Python console alongside the Notebook on the same page.
This is what we delivered with JupyterLab.
Even though it was a very popular,
common demand from the community,
a lot of people really loved
this more rigid full-page Notebook UI,
and kept using the Notebook.
This is where we were about two years ago
when we started the discussion about
Notebook 7 and modernizing the classic Notebook user interface.
>> Was there ever a time where people were thinking to have
JupyterLab be the next version of
Jupyter Notebook and replace it?
Then the people are, "You know what?
Maybe please don't take that away."
>> Yeah.
>> Or they always meant to live side-by-side.
>> No, it was definitely at some point
our strategy to deprecate the Notebook eventually.
We had a large public conversation about this.
It just, I think,
is clear that people like having that choice.
People like having what is just a simple editor for Notebooks,
and people also like having the Swiss Army Knife.
They're not always the same people,
but we want everyone who is using these things to be able to
get both the benefit of
the modern architecture and the updates,
and also the user experience they want.
If most of the plugins that come out lately are for JupyterLab,
and you're feeling more and more left behind,
that's not a great experience.
Deprecating that tool you're using and saying you must use this other one,
it just isn't what our community needed.
Now, we, I think,
have an architecture that we can sustainably maintain
because it's effectively the same code base,
but we also can give users what they want,
because there are different contexts.
It is the case that we would have left some people behind,
and it's better not to.
>> I can imagine in different scenarios,
different user bases,
it might make a lot of sense to have one or the other.
If I'm a data scientist working on complicated projects,
maybe JupyterLab is the right place.
But if I'm trying to teach
a little bit of computation for
a psychology class and I just want them to do three plots and pull in some data,
you don't want to drop non-developers
into something that looks kind of complicated.
Like, where do I go? Here's your page.
You type in these cells, you see the picture.
You get the graph for the study we're talking about or something, right?
>> Yeah, that's exactly the idea.
>> Interesting. So you touched on something interesting there.
That Jupyter Notebook, the single page or the single view version,
is now based on JupyterLab,
and there's a lot of overlap of these things, right?
>> Yeah.
>> Good.
>> Go ahead, Jeremy.
>> Yeah. I don't know if it was the right time to go more into the details.
>> Yeah. Give us a little. It's a bit of a jump ahead,
but just give us a sense that people who,
maybe people are listening, "I'm not going to use JupyterLab.
I'm the Notebook type of person."
There's a lot of what we're talking about that still directly applies
because there's a bunch of similarity or actually reused, right?
>> So one thing we didn't mention yet about JupyterLab is that,
so for end-users, it is indeed a more advanced environment,
a bit more like an ID,
even though it's not really an ID.
But for developers, it's also a framework.
So JupyterLab itself is just a set of plugins and extensions,
and they were designed from the very beginning to be reused in different ways.
So actually, if you go to the JupyterLab repo,
there is an examples folder,
and in there, there are a few different apps
that you can build yourself.
They are not JupyterLab.
They are just a single cell on the page,
or maybe just this one,
maybe just a console,
maybe just a Notebook.
And this is made possible
because JupyterLab is indeed just a set of extensions,
and these examples, they just reuse some of them,
and they just put them together in a different way.
So we sometimes call them remixes,
and in the end, Notebook 7 is a JupyterLab remix.
It's just a different JupyterLab interface,
but focused on a document-centric experience
that users have been liking for many years already.
So yeah, that's a bit of the second side of JupyterLab.
- Excellent.
Yeah, and there's a bunch of features
that we're gonna talk about here
that come to Jupyter Notebooks in 7,
yeah, 7, get the right version for the right product,
because of what you all have done here,
like interactive debugging and real-time collaboration
and things like that, yes?
- Yeah, all of that was really a byproduct
of moving over to the JupyterLab architecture.
And one other key aspect of Notebook 7 over Notebook 6,
is that since we use the text editor from JupyterLab 4,
which is a newer version of CodeMirror,
we also get a lot of benefits in terms of accessibility.
Most of the work on accessibility
has been going into the JupyterLab codebase
and not into the classic Notebook,
which was really based on older versions of older libraries
and JavaScript from the 2010s.
And so we're in a much better shape in this regard
with JupyterLab 4 and Notebook 7.
- It's a different world with JavaScript these days
than it was in 2010.
- That's right.
- Quite a bit.
Well, let's start by talking about
some of the new features for JupyterLab.
One of the ones is for very large notebooks,
JupyterLab is quite a bit faster, right?
That's excellent.
Who wants to take that one?
- I nominate Fred.
- Yeah, I can go ahead with that one.
- Go ahead.
- So yeah, that's one of the complaints of the user
is that when you get lots of Notebook open
or when you get some Notebook that are very lengthy,
the UI responsiveness can be low.
And so we decided to focus quite some time on that aspect.
And that was made possible by fully upgrading
the text editor to the latest version.
So we are using CodeMirror.
It's a awesome third-party library
for dealing with text editor.
And we upgraded to the latest one
that bring up a very important speed up.
And also we have worked on the styling
to try to optimize it because styling
can hit your browser pretty hard.
And lately, we have also introduced
a new way of rendering Notebook, like only rendering
what the user is seeing, basically.
That one is still experimental.
So by default, it's off, and user can try it.
And we are still working on that one
to get it on by default for the next version, so 4.1.
And hopefully, when we reach that milestone,
we get a very smooth experience for 99% of our users.
That's the goal.
Yeah, it's tricky because web browsers typically
want to just have the whole document, the DOM, loaded.
And they want you to just work with it.
But if you've got 100 virtual pages
that you would go through, you don't
want to style all those and do all the widgets and all that
if they're not on the screen.
So there's this tension.
Yeah, exactly.
And sometimes, it can come from tricky part,
like just displaying for education, for example.
They use-- and that's very nice-- a lot of equation,
nice rendering.
And those are creating so many elements in the web page
that sometimes just having not so long Notebook,
but with lots of math expression,
can crush your browser, basically.
That's surprising at first.
Right, OK, so here's what I'm hearing
is complex math, like calculus, differential equations,
those kind of things, not just hard for people,
but also hard for web browsers.
Yeah.
Math is hard for web browsers.
Got it.
Now, that's pretty interesting.
Darren, you showed in your talk, you showed this off
in a video, a side-by-side JupyterLab 3 versus 4
with a large Notebook.
And it was much faster.
Did that video have the virtual paging,
like the rendering, the scene culling thing,
where it doesn't render the stuff it doesn't see?
Or is that just the first default version right now?
This is where I come clean to your audience
and say Fred is the person who produced and recorded
those videos.
And Fred was actually--
Fred was originally going to give that talk.
I can tell you that, yes, that's exactly what's going on.
But Fred can give you the actual details,
because he's the one who hit the record button.
Yeah, tell us, Fred.
I have a very happy event that prevented me
to go to the JupyterCon.
So I was-- normally, it was the one that
had to do the talk with Marta.
But we had to switch last minute.
And thank again, Afin, for doing that.
But definitely, the video that was displayed
was that it's a comparison between the latest 3.6
version and the 4 version with that feature that's
off for now by default.
But that will bring the best performance for the end user.
Yeah, it was a massive speed up.
So on one hand, you're like, ah, you're just
waiting 10 seconds.
But those kinds of little delays,
they just kind of break your thought and your flow.
And you just feel like the tools are getting in the way.
And if it's really, really quick,
then the tools kind of vanish to the background.
And you don't think about them, right?
That's how it should be.
Yeah, exactly.
Even when rendering all of the notebook
and without enabling the virtual scrolling,
we get already a nice speed up already,
thanks to the adoption of CodeMirror 6, which
is much faster to render, and a bunch of other optimizations
that we were able to do.
But yeah, I mean, it was the easiest clap
in the entire talk was just playing that video
and seeing the fast one render and the slow one keep going.
It's a really different user experience,
even though, as you say, it's only a few seconds.
It turns out a few seconds is enough
to cause the kind of interruption that
leaves a negative overall impression in the user's
experience.
Absolutely.
This is not a JupyterLab feature exactly,
but while we're on this code editor topic,
I wanted to ask you all just your thoughts about this.
Now, keep in mind, before I ask this question, my perspective.
I've come from doing a lot of traditional software
development with editors like PyCharm and Visual Studio
Code and others.
So when I work in Jupyter Notebook or Lab,
it doesn't really matter.
And I'll say some variable dot, it
doesn't give me any help unless I press Tab
to see the autocomplete.
Is there an option or discussion around having
more aggressive autocomplete that kind of automatically
shows up as you work with it?
Or is the community just like, we don't really
want that stuff popping up around?
We just want to type.
So the reason it's currently this way
is primarily due to the behavior of Jupyter Notebook
a long time ago and not subverting user expectations.
But we can often keep that as the default
and have some setting to facilitate
a different kind of behavior.
With this one, I think there's probably actual appetite for it,
but no one's shown up to do it.
I don't think we would turn down a feature like this
hidden behind a setting.
I just don't think anyone has both been bothered enough
and also been in the time and place with the resources
and wherewithal necessary to do it.
But it doesn't sound--
yeah, it sounds totally doable and compatible with both
keeping the user expectations intact
and offering you the feature you're talking about.
Because yeah, people have different styles of completion
that they're into.
And new things are appearing all the time
and creating new expectations, like LSP, which changes--
>>Luis: The language server protocol, yeah.
>>Mark: Yeah.
>>Luis: Yeah, anyone else have thoughts on that?
>>Quentin: I would say that in 4.1,
there are things coming to at least give you
the ability to more quickly restore history.
Like you type, and then it's going
to propose you to copy-paste the code that was written
previously in some previous sites and stuff like that.
And the same infrastructure will be available for plugins.
And I know some people are working
on the AI integration in Jupyter.
And some of them are already working.
And OK, let's try to do a request when
the user is typing to help him complete the code
or giving the hint on how to improve things.
And yeah, there are a couple of people working on that.
>>Mark: Yeah, I really like JupyterLab now.
Yeah, OK, I really like JupyterLab and working it now.
But if you could just go, and these
are all the things you can do, just as I would,
it would make me even more happy.
Darren, you mentioned settings.
And that's actually one of the new features
as well as a UI for settings.
Is that right?
>>Darren: Yeah, so this is basically
a front end that's capable of taking any extension's
defined settings and rendering a UI for it.
Because we don't know what the preferences an extension
author is going to want are going to look like.
We can't create a custom UI for it.
Instead, we have to read a schema file that
defines such-- like the extension author who
wrote an extension that does Git also
has a whole bunch of Booleans that are by default set
to true.
So this UI is like, oh, OK, cool.
I'll bring a bunch of checkboxes and check them.
And so it's very flexible.
It can take any extension settings.
And as long as they're described properly according to the API,
they will render inside that UI.
And it really beats what we used to have there,
which is just a JSON blob editor.
And we tried to make it slightly nicer.
I think we tried to make it support a version of JSON
that has inline comments as well.
But it's still not that nice.
So I'm very happy to see this as the way
you go playing around with all the choices you have.
Because JupyterLab has a lot of settings,
but it's really difficult to explore them
without something like this.
-Especially with all the extensions,
kind of an unbounded set, right?
-Exactly.
-The settings UI has a search that
searches through all the different areas for settings.
To pull that up, that's one of my favorite things
on complex apps.
Like, I don't know what is in here,
but I bet if I start typing, it'll
reveal itself if it's in there somewhere, right?
-Yeah.
JupyterLab has two places like that.
One is the command palette also lets
you search the entire menu system, basically.
And that's become-- in other IDs, too.
I mean, I think there's a certain point
as a user of these tools where you discover something
like that.
And then after that point, you don't want to go back.
So I think you're right.
Like, I didn't used to always need search in my applications,
but now I do, just like you say.
-Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
And this really goes--
-Go ahead, Sylvain.
-Yeah, this really goes into the thing
we were mentioning earlier about JupyterLab remixes.
So JupyterLab is basically only a collection of extensions,
right?
And the notebook itself, the command palette,
all of these things are extensions to the core app,
right?
And so remixes are a way to cherry pick
some of these core extensions, potentially
include third-party extensions into a new thing, right?
And I think that there are not many equivalents to JupyterLab
in that regard.
Like, if you try to make a new complex application in the web,
like a photo editor, a CAD engine, anything
that falls into the category of having
to display a lot of information on the screen,
doing something that you spend hours doing every day,
you will want a framework that allows extensibility, theming,
a command palette, unified keyboard shortcuts
across the application, a settings editor for your main
app and all of your extensions.
Configurable keyboard shortcuts, I mentioned that earlier.
Potentially real-time collaboration.
And these are lots of checkboxes to check
if you are starting from scratch.
And so the JupyterLab, basically, application framework
allowed us to reuse all of that work for other things that
have nothing to do with the notebook, for example.
So earlier this year, we released
JupyterCAD, which is a web-based CAD modeler, which
is a JupyterLab remix, really.
Can be used both at the JupyterLab extension,
where you find everything that you're used to,
or in a standalone fashion.
And--
>>This JupyterCAD is really interesting.
It's a 3D CAD, computer-aided design editor,
that's built on top of the JupyterLab framework,
but it's not itself exactly about Jupyter.
Like programming and so on, right?
And it has really interesting things,
it has real-time collaboration between multiple people.
And all of that stuff comes from just building on top of this,
like you said.
That's a good example of something really different,
but still possible.
>>Yeah, so in the way we enable real-time collaboration
in JupyterLab, we have to specialize a few things,
depending on the type of document that you're editing.
But really, the framework is generic.
And you can start enabling real-time collaboration
and other types of content, than just textual content
or whatnot.
And so we all got used to real-time collaboration
and collaborative editing on text,
on the sort of software suite that we
use for basic productivity.
But I'm very convinced that this will
be the case for more technical computing.
Not just code, but everything where
you have to put together a really complex system.
Especially if you are building something that requires
a lot of people to coordinate.
Like you're making a new plane or a football stadium,
and you have this unified model where everything percolates
across many domain-specific applications,
from CAD to electrical systems or whatnot.
And for people to effectively collaborate
in these kinds of environments, I
think collaborative editing is going to bring a lot,
if we can implement this vision.
So really, JupyterCAD is a demonstrator
that you can do collaborative editing on other things
than just notebooks.
>>Luis: Yeah, JupyterLab may become the foundation for things
that we would never expect to be part of programming,
like you're talking about.
It's interesting.
>>Romain: Yeah, it's more technical computing
than just interactive computing, I would say.
>>Luis: Yeah.
I was thinking about this book here, The Old Man Month.
This book is thrown around by Fred Brooks,
basically saying there's no project where
adding more and more people is going to speed it up and get
it done more on time.
It was all about the follies of, well,
as you add more people, the complexity of the communication
and the overhead of syncing and all of that
is going to break everything.
And so you can't make a baby in one month
by having nine women work on it sort of story.
But the stuff that you're talking about here
and all of these communication tools
and all of this interesting async stuff
that we're doing these days, I feel like people
should rethink these ideas.
And I think what you're touching on here
is it is possible to get deeper, important work done as groups
than maybe the mythology that people
think about in the software world traditionally has been.
It's a different world in 2023 and on.
Do you have any thoughts about this?
I mean, it's kind of a sidebar of it.
It's also important to what this collaborative editing.
>>Romain: Yeah, I like this book.
I think the ways--
so for a long time, we have been trying
to introduce real-time collaboration into Jupyter.
We've had at least three significant technical attempts
at it.
It's a hard problem.
It's one we've worked on a long time.
And it's given me a unique opportunity
that most people don't have, which
is try to justify to myself over the course of six years
why anyone should want real-time collaboration inside
a programming environment.
And what I can say is over that time period,
I have spent, I don't know, hundreds of hours
inside documents with other people that are markdown files
because that's how we conduct our meetings,
or inside Google Docs because that's
how we wrote our governance, or asynchronously back and forth
on GitHub, which is not exactly the same thing,
but truly is collaboration.
And so I don't think there's a tension between--
there's a group of us working on something in a room,
and we want technical tools so that we don't all
have to be in that room, but we could have that seamlessness,
and the myth of the mythical--
you know, the man month, right?
I actually think those problems are--
like, on the surface, they look pretty similar,
but I actually think they're not the same thing.
It's more like back when that book was written,
groups of people would get inside one room
and work collaboratively.
Today, every one of us on this call
is in a different location, and some of us are pretty far apart.
We're in different countries, and it's all working out fine.
And Jupyter is bringing tools like that to people,
and less tools like, let's add 5,000 people.
Now, what Sylvan was talking about, still, you're not going
to have one person opening up the grand document that
describes the whole coliseum, right?
But there's going to be tons of groups that
are working on systems where there's
like seven people who need to work on this thing together.
And Google Docs for wiring documents doesn't exist yet,
but it could exist.
Yeah.
And it could be built on JupyterLab.
That's right.
One of the big features is this real-time collaboration.
Let's talk about that for a moment.
I think that's-- I think it's a big deal,
as I've been hinting that with my sidebar and so on.
Well, in the beginning, I think we need to start small.
Even with Google Docs, when it came out, I think in 2006,
a lot of-- many people didn't see the point.
Like, why would I want someone else's cursor in my document?
Sounds dangerous, right?
And so if you were to make a survey of what people wanted
at the time, nobody would have said that, right?
Yet, everybody does that now, right?
And it's probably-- people probably
have the same feeling when it comes to writing code
or doing any sort of technical work.
And I think we'll get past this point where people
will get it.
And in the very beginning, this can start
being useful for peer programming,
doing something together while we're reviewing code
over a Zoom meeting, that sort of thing
where there is a real-time interaction between people
over some kind of medium.
And if you look at more technical objects,
like, for example, you have two different teams.
Like, someone's making a plane.
There is a team of people that's doing some simulation
and see how the plane goes through the air.
And another person is making physical prototypes
of parts of the plane.
And you have this interaction.
Normally, these two groups would be
in two different branches of the company.
And in order to change any kind of spec,
you would need to go up and down in the hierarchy
by a few degrees.
Right, schedule a meeting for next week, that sort of thing.
Yeah, and you change the specs.
And now everybody has to change or make changes
to their boundaries.
And if you enable more real-time feedback on suggestions
and whatnot, you maybe become a lot more efficient.
So it's pretty similar to Google Docs, excuse me.
But you have to install the Jupyter Collaboration
extension for the server, right, in order for this to work?
It's not just pip install JupyterLab,
and you're good to go?
Well, you can pip install JupyterLab and pip
install Jupyter Collaboration if you need the one-liner.
But the idea was lots of people install for personal use
on their own laptops.
And anyone who's going to create an environment where
collaboration is happening is doing more than running just
one command to install Jupyter anyway.
Yeah, of course.
So as a toy, if the five of us are in the same network,
we can launch it that way just to play around with.
But really, any sophisticated user
is going to tie in the user system
and do a whole bunch of config and all those things.
And so we're not shipping the code
that does that inside core JupyterLab for two reasons.
One is that the main install base
doesn't do real-time collaboration.
The other is that we're working on that package much faster
than we're working on JupyterLab core.
And having them in separate packages
allows us to bump versions if we need without caring that much
and to add new features and to just--
it's a smaller subset.
It can move way faster.
Yeah, that's a great design philosophy process
because there was a conversation like this in core Python
and request.
We have a URL library in Python, but request
seems to be the default. We should move it in.
People are like, whoa, whoa, whoa,
you're going to make us ship requests once a year.
We don't want to do that.
This is changing fast, and it needs to be more adaptive.
Sounds like a similar deal here.
Excellent, let's hit on some more of the new things.
So we've got-- we've got lost from where it is.
So one of the things that's new is cell toolbars.
There's like-- when I'm editing a cell within the little cell,
there's a toolbar with some new features.
Anyone want to talk about that?
I mean, I could.
Yeah, go for it.
It's exactly what you said.
And it is-- I think one question often asked by extension
authors is, OK, I want to do a certain thing
to a specific kind of cell, right?
Like I want to somehow pull out this cell
and do something extra with it.
Where do I put that button?
Or it's the answer to that question,
but really all of the things that you can do
were there before.
It's just meant to give users a discoverable way
to learn maybe some capabilities they didn't know,
or maybe even hover over the button
and learn a new keyboard shortcut or something.
It's one of those quality of life features.
It's not like revolutionary.
It's more like just making this thing slightly more ergonomic.
Yeah, I was thinking-- when I saw that, I was thinking of,
you know, the biologists who is doing
their first semester of a class where they
had to use Jupyter notebooks for their work.
And they're like, how do I--
you know, just seeing those buttons
there for the first month of working with it is helpful.
Then as you point out, you learn the hotkeys.
You're like, I press B. I don't go over here with a mouse,
and those kind of things.
But still, I think it's a nice one.
Let's see.
What else did I want to give a shout out to that we
haven't done yet?
Oh, collapsing based on markdown headers.
I think that's kind of interesting
that you can organize your document in a way
to kind of expose parts or make it more of a report
or more of a coding environment and these kind of things.
Who wants to introduce that feature?
I can go ahead.
So yeah, the idea was to--
especially when you have some document that
can be long, like from education that has lots of text
and stuff like that, it tells the student, for example,
to be able to focus or to scroll artificially,
let's say, to the right place more faster.
So that's one of those nice features.
And I think it's something also now we
are used to because lots of classical Office text editor
have that kind of ability.
So it was a nice feature to add to in JupyterLab.
Yeah, kind of related, and it's probably
going to sound really boring, but it actually
is pretty awesome, I think, is the table of contents,
where it looks like it's showing the table of contents.
But if you say run all cells, it'll
actually show you as you go--
it'll sort of go down the table of contents
showing where in some big doc, if the running
cell is off the screen, what it's working on currently,
which is actually pretty excellent, I think.
Yeah, and even soon, you could also
report that one cell crashed, and you should look at it.
That's coming up in the next--
That's coming up in the next version.
OK, excellent.
What else?
Running kernels in the side panel
sounds kind of interesting, like different kernels.
You can go create notebooks based on them
and see all of what is at play.
I think that's probably worthwhile as well.
Yeah, so this is more something you
would care about if you're running
JupyterLab than notebooks.
So it's a sidebar in JupyterLab that just says,
in the environment where you're running,
here are all the kernels that you as a user can see.
And so you can even have kernels that might not
be coming from your Jupyter server at some future date,
right?
The idea being, why shouldn't JupyterLab
be the place you interact with lots of different resources,
wherever they might be?
And for the longest time, we thought
of a running kernel session, for want of a better word,
as intricately tied to a file, right?
The notebook that it's the kernel for.
But we've been moving away from that.
I mean, the same way IPython hits a kernel
but isn't really transient, we have code consoles
inside JupyterLab that aren't really transient.
But you can take a notebooks kernel
and open a code console on it so that you
could do some scratch work but not modify a document.
So there's just having more insight
into what's available in your environment
is what that's about.
And again, it's not a revolutionary change.
It's just one of these sort of ergonomic features
to make it a better multi-tool for being
in an environment that gives you lots of different kernels
to play with.
The sort of use case that we'd like to tackle with this
is, for example, there are lots of desktop applications
that embed a Python interpreter, like FreeCAD or Blender.
And eventually, if these desktop applications advertise
a way to connect to these running
interpreters with a Jupyter kernel API,
then they would be listed there.
And yeah.
>>Luis: So the JupyterLab could almost
become a scripting front end to, say,
like a running Blender project or something like that?
>>Quentin: Exactly.
So this has already been done, actually,
in a Kitwer's Slicer 3D project.
So they run a kernel as part of their desktop application.
And so we want to streamline that use case
and make it more easier to do.
>>Luis: I'm sure the UI for a lot of people's hosted,
integrated Python is really poor.
There's probably-- maybe you'll get auto-indentation
if you're lucky, right?
It's just there's not a great story.
So they could just, like the other examples
we talked about, build upon what JupyterLab is already doing.
Just add their part, yeah?
>>Quentin: Exactly.
Rather than them having to reinvent everything,
they can just reuse Jupyter.
>>Luis: Yeah.
And because of the extensions, you
could theoretically have a Blender extension
for JupyterLab.
>>Quentin: Yeah.
Actually, someone has made one.
So for the specific use case, I think
it's Jan Hendrik Muller has a Blender extension
to render Blender model in line with the notebook.
So yeah, check it out.
>>Luis: Excellent.
All right, y'all.
We're getting very short on time here.
There's two things I want to touch on really quick
before we put a wrap on it.
These are not exactly brand new things,
but they're very exciting.
And one is JupyterLite.
And Jeremy, I know you've done a lot with JupyterLite.
You want to tell us quick about JupyterLite?
>>Jeremy: Yeah, sure.
So the idea behind JupyterLite is
to have a full Jupyter distribution that
runs in a web browser.
So normally, when you use Jupyter,
you need to install the JupyterLab package, Python
package, or the notebook Python package on your machine
or on a server.
But with JupyterLite, you don't need to do this.
So in the end, what you get is just a set of static files.
So it's just a bunch of files sitting on disk.
And you just have HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and WebAssembly.
So the main difference compared to a traditional Jupyter
installation is the fact that the execution,
the environment runs in a browser as well.
So for example, Python, but it could also
be other languages that are compiled to WebAssembly.
So all of this is, again, built on the shoulder of Giants.
So like the whole--
>>DANIEL: Yeah, this is awesome.
This is so awesome.
>>JEREMY: The Jupyter stack is just
another way of remixing the whole stack.
So you take a bit of JupyterLab, a little bit
of the Jupyter protocol to interact with the kernels.
And then even the kernels can be reused in some way.
And then you put that together and make something new.
So that's the idea behind JupyterLite.
It was also made possible by the work on the Pyodite.
So this Python compiled to WebAssembly.
Since Python is still the most heavily used language
in Jupyter, this is kind of what people
expect when they use Jupyter and JupyterLite
to have a Python kernel.
>>DANIEL: So if I wanted to, say, host some interactive code
exploration, I want to have something
that people can play with.
Maybe I'm an educator and I've got 1,000 students.
But I don't want to set up a server
and worry about what people might do to it.
But I want to give them flexibility, right?
Like, this is really nice.
You could just put this on a static file server like Netlify
and there it goes, right?
>>JEREMY: Yeah, that's definitely a use case.
So GitHub pages, read the docs.
It's very simple.
It's much simpler than having to do sysadmin work
to install packages.
And also for the end user, it's also
simpler because you don't have to install anything.
Everything is already prepackaged.
>>DANIEL: It's crazy.
It looks just like JupyterLab.
But it's--
>>JEREMY: Yeah, because it is, in the end, just JupyterLab.
But yeah, and there is also a Notebook 7 running as well.
So again, like we were talking about earlier,
if some users prefer to have this document-centric
interface, then they can also use Notebook 7 instead.
>>DANIEL: Yeah, it's excellent if you
want to give access to some notebook
but not run a server.
I think there's kind of two options here.
This is one of them.
The other is if I'm going to give a notebook file
to somebody and say, here, run this on your computer,
there's a lot of assumptions about what
happens at that point.
Do you have Python?
Do you have the right Python?
Do you have permissions to install
Jupyter and all the other dependencies?
Can you run a server?
Do you know what a terminal is?
That's a long conversation.
And so I think the other thing that's really interesting--
I don't know where I pulled it up--
but yeah, Jupyter Desktop is also
quite interesting as a quick start
to getting a Jupyter Python environment on your system,
right?
>>Yeah.
Yeah, that's some work done by Mehmet.
And yeah, basically, it bundled an Electron.
So it's a web browser that's packaged with JupyterLab.
And it's very powerful because now it
can come with its own Python.
But you can also use the Python that you
have on your computer.
And yeah, that's really a nice way
for distributing and easing the installation for the end user,
especially on non-friendly operating systems.
Let's call it like that.
>>Sure, or people who are not familiar with it.
>>Yeah, for sure.
>>Yeah, I mean, you've got a Mac--
well, there is a macOS ARM and 64 version.
There's a Debian and Fedora.
There's a Windows EXE.
Like, that's--
>>No, it really solved the problem of,
I've never used the command line,
but I know lots of math, right?
So--
>>Yes, exactly.
But when I run MATLAB, I just click the MATLAB icon,
and then I get that shell.
What is-- why can't I have permissions to install Jupyter?
It says I don't have--
>>No, I get it.
>>That whole frustration side could go away, I think.
This is interesting.
>>But I mean, this is a harder problem
than one might imagine just because of how many packages
there are in the ecosystem, what things you might be using.
So JupyterLab Desktop is pretty clever.
It can also detect if you have Conda or Mamba installed
and use those environments.
It can use a running server.
So it ships with the newest version of JupyterLab, right?
But it could also connect to a server that's
serving a different version of JupyterLab and give you that.
It can be a client to different JupyterLabs,
is what I mean.
One time, just to see if it would work,
I ran Jupyter Notebook and Lab and Desktop
with real-time collaboration, and it
turns out you could do that.
So it really is like first-class JupyterLab,
and it's very flexible, and it tries
to integrate with what you've got.
If you've got nothing, it brings what it needs.
If you've got Conda set up, it finds stuff there.
If you've got Mamba set up, it finds stuff there.
So it basically tries to be exactly what that first user
experience you would want is.
You go, you download, you double-click a file.
The only thing that's missing is you have
to go to GitHub to get this.
We should probably put it in an easier place for you to find.
-Yeah.
Yeah, possibly.
Maybe in the various stores.
I don't know.
That's such a hassle, but--
-Well, no, I just mean go to jupyter.org/download.
I just set a URL.
Sadly, it's not going to work for you,
but maybe we should do that, right?
-Yes, exactly.
That would be a pretty easy thing to do, actually.
Just detect the OS and highlight that,
or have that little dropdown, choose another OS, right?
See all downloads.
-I think these two options are going to really make
it possible to reach the next 10 million users of Jupyter.
Especially Jupyter Lite, in terms of scalability,
is unmatched at the moment.
There is a deployment of an in-browser Jupyter flavor
in use at the moment by the French high school system.
They started with the Paris area,
and now they enabled all the school districts.
There is over half a million users on this deployment,
200,000 sessions per week.
And it's all served with one single virtual machine.
And if they were trying to do this
with one Docker image per user session, it wouldn't fly.
-No, they'd need a massive IT team to pull that off.
-Exactly.
And France is not home to hyperscaler cloud providers,
so we would need to host that on Azure or Alibaba or Google.
And that would be an enormous cost, right?
And this is incredibly cheap.
There are some limitations to WebAssembly.
But for the sort of use cases, what a high schooler is going
to do in a notebook, like learning
how to write for loops or computing a greatest
command in a miniature, this is more than enough.
The complexity of it is lesser than rendering the UI.
So yeah.
-I think you're absolutely right.
That's why I put them both side by side, the Jupyter Lite
and the Jupyter Desktop app.
I think they kind of address similar audience,
but in a different way.
Check this out, by the way.
This probably won't come through very well.
But this is my iPad, and I've got Jupyter Lite working just
the same on my browser there as I did-- or it would be a Chrome
book or whatever, right?
It really reaches a big audience.
-Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, modern browsers now can all handle it.
It's not the bad old days, at least on that front.
And I think there will be a lot of really exciting things
that happen inside browsers that will surprise anyone who
is using this era of the web.
Like, we're about to see crazy things.
-We are about to see crazy things.
Well, we already see crazy things.
We'll see more of them, that's for sure.
That's for sure.
All right, y'all.
I think we are out of time, but we are certainly not
out of topics.
We could keep talking for a long time.
But we'll close it here, I guess.
Final thoughts, call to action.
People want to check this stuff out.
Maybe they want to upgrade from an older version
to either JupyterLab 4 or Jupyter Notebook 7.
What do you say?
-Pip install Notebook.
Pip install JupyterLab, and have fun.
-Dash dash upgrade.
-Yes, good point.
-Guess you already got it.
-Full request, welcome.
Awesome, yeah.
So it's a huge project with lots of people involved.
Roderick, final thoughts.
-Yeah, that's a very fun project to work on too.
So if people are willing to contribute,
just come and contribute to it.
There is plenty of spaces, as we have just
touched some of them here.
And we are very happy to have new contributors
and help people learn the ecosystem to try to contribute.
And there is no small contribution.
There is no small contribution.
Everybody is welcome.
-Yeah.
Somebody could set up the download page for Jupyter
Desktop, for example, right?
-Exactly.
Jeremy, you get the final word.
-Yeah, that was what I was going to say a little bit as well.
The Jupyter community is very welcoming.
So you can contribute in many different ways.
It doesn't have to be about technical details or code only.
Even just putting a talk out there, for example,
or going to JupyterCon and sharing your use cases
is already very valuable to the community
and also to the developers.
Because they can learn about how people use the tools
and get a very valuable feedback.
So that will be your one call to action
is don't hesitate to get involved.
And if you think there is room to improve, for sure.
As you were saying before, PRs are welcome, as we say often.
And yeah, check out the latest update on JupyterLite
because there is going to be an exciting new update
to the JupyterLab 4 and Notebook 7 coming in a couple of days.
So I think maybe by the time this podcast is released,
it will probably be out already.
And also exciting developments when
it comes to real-time collaboration in JupyterLite,
Desktop, JupyterLab together.
- Yeah, very exciting.
A lot of things are already great here
that we talked about.
These are some big changes.
So thank you all for being on the show
and sharing what you and everyone else has been up to.
- Thanks very much.
- Yeah, thank you.
- Bye.